---
layout: post
title: "Napoléon le Petit"
author: Victor Hugo
category: Hugo
description: First six paragraphs of 'Napoléon le Petit'
locale: en_US
categories:
  - French
  - Essay
tags:
  - Politics
  - Criticism
---
<strong>December 20, 1848</strong>
<p></p>

On Thursday, December 20, 1848, the Constituent Assembly, being in session,
surrounded at that moment by an imposing display of troops, heard the report of
the Representative<!--more--> Waldeck-Rousseau, read on behalf of the committee which had
been appointed to scrutinize the votes in the election of President of the
Republic; a report in which general attention had marked this phrase, which
embodied its whole idea: "It is the seal of its inviolable authority which the
nation, by this admirable application of the fundamental law, itself affixes on
the Constitution, to render it sacred and inviolable." Amid the profound silence
of the nine hundred representatives, of whom almost the entire number was
assembled, the President of the National Constituent Assembly, Armaud Marrast,
rose and said:—

"In the name of the French people,

"Whereas Citizen Charles-Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte, born at Paris, fulfils the
conditions of eligibility prescribed by Article 44 of the Constitution;

"Whereas in the ballot cast throughout the extent of the territory of the
Republic, for the election of President, he has received an absolute majority of
votes;

"By virtue of Articles 47 and 48 of the Constitution, the National Assembly
proclaims him President of the Republic from this present day until the second
Sunday in May, 1852."

There was a general movement on all the benches, and in the galleries filled
with the public; the President of the Constituent Assembly added:

"According to the terms of the decree, I invite the Citizen President of the
Republic to ascend the tribune, and to take the oath."

The representatives who crowded the right lobby returned to their places and
left the passage free. It was about four in the afternoon, it was growing dark,
and the immense hall of the Assembly having become involved in gloom, the
chandeliers were lowered from the ceiling, and the messengers placed lamps on
the tribune. The President made a sign, the door on the right opened, and there
was seen to enter the hall, and rapidly ascend the tribune, a man still young,
attired in black, having on his breast the badge and riband of the Legion of
Honour.

All eyes were turned towards this man. A pallid face, its bony emaciated angles
thrown into bold relief by the shaded lamps, a nose large and long, moustaches,
a curled lock of hair above a narrow forehead, eyes small and dull, and with a
timid and uneasy manner, bearing no resemblance to the Emperor,—this man was
Citizen Charles-Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte.

During the murmurs which greeted his entrance, he remained for some instants,
his right hand in the breast of his buttoned coat, erect and motionless on the
tribune, the pediment of which bore these dates: February 22, 23, 24; and above
which were inscribed these three words: Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.

Before being elected President of the Republic, Charles-Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte
had been a representative of the people for several months, and though he had
rarely attended a whole sitting, he had been frequently seen in the seat he had
selected, on the upper benches of the Left, in the fifth row in the zone
commonly called the Mountain, behind his old preceptor, Representative
Vieillard. This man, then, was no new figure in the Assembly, yet his entrance
on this occasion produced a profound sensation. It was to all, to his friends as
to his foes, the future that entered, an unknown future. Amid the immense murmur,
produced by the whispered words of all present, his name passed from mouth to
mouth, coupled with most diverse opinions. His antagonists detailed his
adventures, his coups-de-main, Strasburg, Boulogne, the tame eagle, and the
piece of meat in the little hat. His friends dwelt upon his exile, his
proscription, his imprisonment, an excellent work of his on the artillery, his
writings at Ham, which were marked, to a certain degree, with the liberal,
democratic, and socialistic spirit, the maturity of the more sober age at which
he had now arrived; and to those who recalled his follies, they recalled his
misfortunes.
